look for the evolution and organization
of the federal intelligence function a
brief overview 1776 through 1975
prepared for the Select Committee by dr.
Harold C irelia analyst and American
national government government and
general research division Congressional
Research Service Library of Congress
introduction for centuries before the
birth of Christ sunsoo a Chinese
military theorist counseled that quote
the reason the enlightened prince or the
wise general conquer the enemy whenever
they move and their achievements
surpassed those of ordinary men is
foreknowledge what is called
foreknowledge cannot be elicited from
spirits nor from the gods nor by analogy
with past events nor from calculations
it must be obtained for men who know the
enemy's situation end quote
in this observation is the essence of
what modern civilization refers to as
intelligence as defined by the
prestigious and highly respected
Commission on the organization of the
executive branch chaired by former
President Herbert C Hoover quote
intelligence deals with all the things
that should be known in advance of
initiating a course of action end quote
but the concept is not synonymous with
information Admiral William F Rayburn
director of the Central Intelligence
Agency from 1964 to 1966 explained quote
intelligence as we use the term refers
to information which has been carefully
evaluated as to its accuracy and
significance the difference between
information and intelligence is the
important process of evaluating the
accuracy and assessing the significance
in terms of national security end quote
expanding upon the idea of information
evaluation preparatory to policy
development intelligence may be
understood as
the product resulting from the
collection evaluation analysis
integration and interpretation of all
available information which concerns one
or more aspects of foreign nations or of
areas of operations and which is
immediately or potentially significant
to planning end quote intelligence
activities need not rely upon spies and
informers to secure for knowledge
information obtained in the open
marketplace of ideas and international
communications media can with proper
analysis significantly contribute to an
intelligence product further the
possible utilization of spies and
informers raises both the Machiavellian
question of ends versus means and a
practical question regarding impersonal
spying for some the righteousness of the
cause sanctions clandestine information
gathering others condone such activity
when it is confined to technological
devices such as robot spy planes space
satellites deep-sea sensors and
listening devices or code breaking
machines intelligence activities were a
developed art among the ancients
practice experience and technology have
contributed to the sophistication of
this pursuit today it may be assumed
that every nation regardless of their
form of government or guiding political
philosophy engages in some type of
intelligence activity minimally the
intelligence function contributes to the
preservation and security of the state
beyond this denominator the intelligence
function variably extends to the
cultivation of the most grandiose
schemes of international relations and
world power one research limitations
because intelligence activities are
generally cloaked in official and
operational secrecy research on the
evolution organization and activities of
the federal intelligence community may
be hampered by a scarcity of useful
resource material and a plague of
inaccuracies affected
by a lack of corroborating evidence or
reliance upon a common erroneous source
footnote official secrecy refers to some
type of legal authority establishing the
compulsory withholding of certain types
of information from disclosure
operational secrecy refers to non
acknowledgement of actions either by
announcement or upon open questioning
end footnote other research problems
derive from the attitude of federal
officials and the leaders of the armed
services toward the intelligence
function prior to World War one within
the departments and agencies
intelligence activities were viewed as
neither necessary nor serious concerns
the naive view prevailed that the major
foreign powers of the day made little
use of and had little use for
intelligence if this was the case then
the United States need not engage in
such efforts when World War one
introduced America to modern warfare it
also provided an opportunity to examine
the intelligence activities of the
allies the net effect was one of
embarrassment much was learned from the
war experience with regard to building a
useful and effective intelligence
structure nevertheless the historical
record must necessarily reflect scant
consideration being given to
intelligence activities at the federal
level prior to the World War perhaps as
an attempt to compensate for the actual
circumstances of the pre-war situation
some accounts of federal intelligence
activity appeared to overstate or
overemphasize the importance of certain
agents or operatives and the
significance of certain accomplishments
thus a careful effort must be made to
maintain a sense of historical
proportion with regard to the exploits
of individuals and the causation of
events and the sphere of intelligence
operations it should also be kept in
mind that very early intelligence
activities in the United States were
highly sporadic and individualistic
these conditions contribute to research
difficulties with the result that very
few records were produced or continued
to exist
and one final note must be added
regarding the limitations of historical
records in this area of research some
significant developments in the
evolution of federal intelligence
operations have escaped written account
and useful and important documents for
this research have been destroyed for
reasons of political sensitivity
embarrassment security and personal
privacy to intelligence Authority the
Constitution of the United States is
silent regarding any direct reference to
intelligence activities within article 1
section 8 Congress has granted certain
powers which have an implication for the
enactment of statutes operationalizing
the intelligence function these include
the authority to support armies maintain
a navy and quote make rules for the
government and regulation of the land
and naval forces end quote relying upon
these provisions Congress might have
directly established armed forces
intelligence operations and provided for
the restriction of intelligence
information by enacting appropriate
rules for federal civilian employees and
regulations for military and Navy
personnel that the House and Senate did
not directly legislate on these matters
does not affect the implied
constitutional authority what the
legislature did was provide a more
ambitious and sophisticated
organizational and administrative
structure derivative of these powers the
Department of War created in 1789 and
the Department of the Navy established
in 1798 it may be argued that it was
within the discretion of the executive
authority of these entities to organize
intelligence operations in conformity
with the constitutional power exercised
by Congress in creating the department's
footnote a permanent intelligence unit
was established in the Navy Department
in 1882 and in the War Department in
1885 both actions or internal directive
ad-hoc and temporary spy systems of
varying sophistication have been
utilized by the Armed Forces since the
time of the revolution end footnote
modern intelligence operations authority
continues to rest upon these basic
constitutional provisions interpreted by
Congress to grant power to legislate for
the defense and security of the nation
footnote the principle contemporary
intelligence activities statutes are the
National Security Act of 1947 and the
Central Intelligence Act of 1949 which
established the National Security
Council and the Central Intelligence
Agency much of the existing intelligence
structure was created at the direction
of the President or other executive
branch officials and therefore has no
direct statutory base and footnote the
president would appear to derive
Authority for intelligence activities
from two constitutional provisions
article 2 section 2 names the president
the commander in chief of the Army and
Navy and section 3 directs that the
chief executive quote take care that the
laws be faithfully executed end quote as
these are very vague and general
provisions reliance upon them alone as
Authority for intelligence activity
would depend upon a president's view of
his office a chief executive adopting
Theodore Roosevelt's classic stewardship
theory would undoubtedly have little
reservation in utilizing such implied
powers to justify intelligence
operations in his autobiography
Roosevelt exemplified his view of the
presidency explaining quote the most
important factor in getting the right
spirit in my administration next to the
insistence upon courage honesty and a
genuine democracy of desire to serve the
plain people was my insistence upon the
theory that the executive power was
limited
only by specific restrictions and
prohibitions appearing in the
Constitution or imposed by the Congress
under its constitutional powers my view
was that every executive officer and
above all every executive officer in
high position was a steward of the
people and not to content himself with
the negative merit of keeping his
talents undamaged in a napkin I declined
to adopt the view that what was
imperatively necessary for the nation
could not be done by the president
unless he could find some specific
authorization to do it my belief was
that it was not only his right but his
duty to do anything that the needs of
the nation demanded unless such action
was forbidden by the Constitution or by
the laws under this interpretation of
executive power I did and caused to be
done many things not previously done by
the President and the heads of the
departments I did not usurp power but I
did greatly broaden the use of executive
power in other words I acted for the
public welfare I acted for the common
well-being of all our people whenever
and in whatever manner was necessary
unless prevented by direct
constitutional or legislative
prohibition I did not care a rap for the
mere form and show of power
I cared immensely for the use that could
be made of the substance end quote
just a few months before leaving office
in June 1908 Roosevelt told Sir George
auto Trevelyan quote while president I
have been president emphatically I have
used every ounce of power there was in
the office and I have not cared a wrap
for the criticisms of those who spoke of
my usurpation of power for I know that
the talk has been all nonsense and that
there has been no usurpation I believe
that the efficiency of this government
depends upon it possessing a strong
central executive and whenever I could
establish a president for strength in
the executive as I did for instance as
regards external affairs in the case of
sending the
fleet around the world taking Panama
settling affairs of Santo Domingo and
Cuba or as I did in internal affairs and
settling the anthracite coal strike in
keeping order in Nevada or as I have
done in bringing the big corporations to
book in all these cases I felt not
merely that my action was right in
itself but that in showing the strength
of or in giving strength to the
executive I was establishing a precedent
of value I believed that responsibility
should go with power and that it is not
well that the strong executive should be
a perpetual executive endquote opposed
to this view of the presidency was
Roosevelt's former Secretary of War 1905
through 1908 personal choice for and
actual successor as chief executive
William Howard Taft
according to America's 27th president
quote the true view of the executive
functions is as I conceived it that the
president can exercise no power which
cannot be fairly and reasonably traced
to some specific grant of power or
justly implied and included within such
Express grant as proper and necessary to
its exercise such specific grant must be
either in the Federal Constitution or in
an act of Congress passed in pursuance
thereof there is no undefined residual
of power which he can exercise because
it seems to him to be in the public
interest and there is nothing in the
Nagle case and its definition of a law
of the United States or an other
precedence warranting such an
interference the grants of executive
power are necessary in general terms in
order not to embarrass the executive
within the field of action plainly
marked for him but his jurisdiction must
be justified and vindicated by
affirmative constitutional or statutory
provision or it does not exist there
have not been wanting however eminent
men in high public office holding a
different view and who have insisted
upon the necessity for an
undefined residual of executive power in
the public interest they have not been
confined to the present generation and
quote between these two views of the
presidency live various gradations of
opinion as many conceptions of the
office as there have been holders the
argument may be advanced however that
those holding Roosevelt's stewardship
theory would be more comfortable with
undertaking constitutionally ill-defined
intelligence activities also a
president's view of his office will
change with time and circumstances
though he had argued against the
stewardship theory and his Blumenthal
lectures at Columbia University in 1915
and 1916 former President Taft writing
the majority opinion of the Supreme
Court as chief justice in the Myers case
appealed to the opening Clause of
article 2 of the Constitution as a grant
of power he held that the chief
executive had the right to remove
executive and administrative officers of
the United States nominated or appointed
by him without the least restraint or
limitation by Congress the Constitution
Taft contended intended such officers to
serve only at the president's pleasure
following this example if momentary
circumstances suggested such action and
neither the Constitution or Congress
offered any restraints upon same then a
president might enter into intelligence
operations under the color of the
commander-in-chief clause or the
faithful execution of the laws provision
the founders of the republic did not
have intelligence activities in their
immediate purview when drafting the
Constitution and assigning powers and
functions to the branches of government
established by this instrument
nevertheless implied authority for such
pursuits appears to have been granted to
both the executive and the legislature
this situation has permitted each branch
to act independently with regard to
intelligence organization and policy and
has contributed as well to conflicts
between them on these matters
what follows here is an overview of the
evolution and organization of the
federal intelligence function with a
view to its origins and development
within the context of a constitutional
Democratic Republic this is our hidden
history
you